# primes-multiplication-table
Coding challenge for Funding Circle US. This program prints out a multiplication table of the first N prime numbers, where N is an integer and where the first row and column of the table have N primes. When run, main.js executes with an N = 10, as this was the primary goal of the program. However, the program can be used for any N from 0 to very large numbers.

## Programming Process
primes-multiplication-table.js contains four separate functions, each of which perform a specific task in the overall purpose of the program. 

* **generatePrimesArray:** Takes in an integer, n, that represents the first N prime numbers desired--calls on the isPrime function to determine if a given number is prime or not
* **isPrime:** Utilizes the theory behind the *sieve of Eratosthenes* (I am a math major, after all) to determine primality
* **multiplyPrimes:** Takes the primes array generated by generatePrimesArray as a parameter and multiplies each item in the array by the other items in the array to produce an array of arrays, each of which represents a row in the eventual multiplication table
* **displayTable:** Takes the array of arrays as a parameter and prints each array (row) of the multiplication table with the appropriate spacing

The AirBnb JavaScript [style guide](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript/blob/master/README.md) was used to direct the styling of the program. 

## Runtime Complexity
The real time of execution for the program when N = 10 and when N = 1001 are as follows:

**N = 10**
`real	0m0.095s`
`user	0m0.071s`
`sys	0m0.021s`

**N = 1001**
`real	0m0.849s`
`user	0m0.557s`
`sys	0m0.138s`

* **generatePrimesArray** and **isPrime:** The overall runtime of generatePrimesArray, which within it calls isPrime, is O(n + m^(3/2)), where n is the number of primes to accumulate, and m is the number of composite numbers that are checked in order to accumulate those n primes. Because all composite integers have at least one prime factor, none of which exceed sqrt(n + m), the runtime for isPrime as a standalone function is O(sqrt(n + m)), so the runtime for generatePrimesArray as an standalone function is O(n + m). The cost of pushing primes to the array is an amortized cost of O(1). It's possible that this runtime could be improved by passing in the already accumulated primes each time a new number is passed to isPrime. Doing so would eliminate the need to re-check all numbers (composite and prime) lower than the sqrt(n), and instead only check against all accumulated primes less than a given number. 

* **multiplyPrimes:** Due to the nested .forEach loops, this function has a runtime of O(n^2), where n still refers to the number of primes in the array generated previously. It is possible that because of the way that multiplication tables are inherently set up, the multiplication process could be cut almost in half, since each number in the first row and first column of a multiplication table is multiplied by each other twice. 

* **displayTable:** For the same reason as multiplyPrimes (nested .forEach loops), displayTable has a runtime complexity of O(n^2). 

## Testing
The program was developed using BDD, via the open source [Jasmine Behavior-Driven JavaScript](https://jasmine.github.io/pages/getting_started.html) testing framework. Jasmine was selected over other commonly utilized options (such as Mocha and Jest) because it is independent of the DOM and other JavaScript frameworks, and comes with all of the necessary basics out of the box. Mocha is extremely versatile, but requires using the assertion library, and Jest is best for large projects, and is often used alongside React.

## Using the Program
This program is available as a package via `npm i primes-multiplication-table`. For more on the use of `npm`, you can check out the docs [here](https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm).
